In addition to the accounting balance, at the beginning of the lecture we listed other documents related to financial accounting.
Other forms, forms 2, 3 and so on.
They are smaller in volume than the accounting balance, less significant,
but nevertheless they sometimes contain information that is very valuable and used for financial accounting analysis.
When we study the course Financial and Economic Analysis,
we will see that all forms, especially forms 2 and 4,
actively use the information in them,
which is needed to conduct financial analysis.
Now we will not dwell on these additional forms.
You can read more about them in the supplement as additional material.
And now we move on to our second question.
Our second question is about the financial results.
We have a financial report,
and looking at this financial report, we should see what are the results of our enterprise.
If an experienced financier asks,
what are the indicators, a huge number of financial indicators and coefficients,
the most important ones when analyzing the financial results of the enterprise,
those that give the maximum information about the financial state of the enterprise,
will tell you that the indicators are profit and profitability.
Remember, profit and profitability are the most important indicators of the enterprise financial state.
We will talk about them in more detail.
Profit is a part of the revenue of the enterprise,
which is left after all the expenses are taken from it,
which the enterprise has to pay for the revenue.
Profit is a rather multifaceted indicator.
There are many different segments that can characterize profit.
In the slide you see only some indicators of profit
that can reflect the various aspects of the enterprise financial state.
Look at this slide.
In the first place is the profit.
The first step of the profit can be discussed in the financial analysis.
The profit is obtained if the self-worth is subtracted from the revenue.
It is clear that the profit, with all its value,
is not reflected by all the aspects of the enterprise.
If the commercial and administrative expenses are subtracted from the self-worth,
without which it is impossible to make a profit,
we will get a profit from the sale.
It is less than the self-worth.
Of course, it is less.
But without the administrative expenses, without the management of the enterprise,
it would be impossible to get this profit.
If the revenue from the sale is subtracted from the other revenues and expenses
that the enterprise has,
which are associated with additional revenues or additional expenses,
which we have already discussed today.
For example, you took a loan for a percentage.
After the term of the loan is over, you return the money and the percentage.
You have additional expenses.
You could also provide a loan or a loan.
You could take out loans.
You could have additional expenses or revenues,
not related to the main activity.
Revenues from the financial activity of your enterprise.
Taking into account these revenues and expenses,
a profit is formed that is needed before the tax is paid.
That is, a profit that will already be paid by the tax.
And only after we subtract the taxes from the profit,
which are due to the payment of the tax on the profit,
and subtract the deposited tax assets and obligations,
which arise due to the fact that not all the profits
that the enterprise has are subject to taxation.
Not all.
The tax code gives certain deductions,
which must be made before the tax proceeds.
So, if we carry out all the necessary operations,
we will get the profit that is due to the tax,
we will subtract the taxes from the tax,
and we will get the most interesting part of the profit.
A pure profit.
A pure profit is the profit that is left with the enterprise,
and which is the absolute property of the enterprise.
An enterprise with a pure profit can do everything it considers necessary.
There are no restrictions on the use of a pure profit.
All taxes have been paid for it.
All calculations have already been made with everyone.
A pure profit is the property of the enterprise itself.
A pure profit can be used for any needs of the enterprise,
including the payment of dividends to the owners of this enterprise,
as a reward for the fact that they created this enterprise.
The next indicator that characterizes the financial result is profitability.
An important indicator,
an important indicator that is no less important than the profit itself.
Profitability, as an indicator, regardless of the enterprise's activities,
reflects the efficiency of the enterprise.
Therefore, profitability is the effect of the enterprise's functioning
on the costs that had to be incurred to get this effect.
Any profitability is the effect of the costs.
And since various costs cause various effects,
we can consider various segments of profitability.
Financiers consider many segments.
In the slides, we present the most important segments
that arise when analyzing profitability.
For example, profitability of the produced product.
What costs were incurred?
The costs of manufacturing the product.
These costs are the cost of production.
And what effect did they get?
They got a profit from the sale.
The relationship between profit and cost is the profitability of the produced product.
And we can make other variants of profitability based on this formula.
For example, the profitability of sales.
This is the relationship between profit and sales to revenue.
Revenue is the cost of getting this profit.
Or the profitability of the capital itself
The profitability of the capital itself shows how effectively the capital was invested in the business.
The profitability of the capital itself is an indicator that is very interesting for the business owner.
After all, for a businessman, the owner of the enterprise,
it does not matter where he invested his capital.
He has the widest range of investments.
You can invest in different types of business.
In each, the profitability of the investment will be different.
Today, in our country, capital is not so easy to flow from one industry to another
to align the norm of profitability.
Therefore, the profitability is different.
And therefore, a businessman is interested, a real businessman,
who invests capital not in the form of activity,
but who invests capital in order to get a profit.
He is interested in the profitability of the investment of this capital.
He will be interested in his business and other types of business
to evaluate whether it is worth doing another type of business
or maybe it is worth investing money in another type of business
if the profitability of the capital is higher there.
Therefore, we say that the attitude of net profit to one's own capital
is the most important indicator of profitability that interests the businessman.
And the indicator of net profit is the most important indicator that characterizes the profit.
As we have already said, net profit is the profit that remains at the enterprise.
There is also profitability of investments.
An enterprise can invest money in its development.
It is wonderful to invest, to develop.
But any businessman is interested in how effective it is to invest money in a particular project.
Is it worth creating a new workshop, mastering the production of new products?
Is it worth studying something new, inventing something new,
investing huge amounts of money? What will it bring?
This is exactly what shows the profitability of investments.
The attitude of net profit to investments.
This is an interesting indicator that characterizes modern business.
That is why when we talk about the analysis of financial results,
we will first talk about how the net profit changes and how profitability changes.
What influences these indicators?
Here we need to make a small reservation.
Unfortunately, we live in a real business where reality and the theory that comes from science do not always coincide.
When we say that profit is the goal of capitalistic production,
it reflects that the higher the profit and the higher the profitability, the more effectively the enterprise works.
This is the absolute truth.
And this is where the following would come from.
Every businessman should strive to build his enterprise in such a way that he earns as much as possible.
And be proud that the profit at his enterprise is the highest,
that the profitability of this business is the highest.
This is the main task of a businessman, which he should be proud of.
But the fact is that in addition to earning profit, there is also taxation.
Any state takes taxes for the simple reason that the state has expenses that it must pay in order for the country to function normally.
But the financial structure of the state always decides what taxes to take and how much.
In different countries, taxes are different.
And the tax burden in different countries is different.
And the tax structure in different countries is different.
And this tax structure leads to the fact that some taxes are heavier in one country and lighter in another.
Such a tax, which is very important from the tax burden and from the point of view of the business, is the tax on profit.
If the tax on profit is excessive from the point of view of the business,
then the enterprise strives to minimize the profit it shows,
or even minimize the profit it earns.
In order to pay a smaller tax.
We see a contradiction here.
On the one hand, the development of a business requires as much profit as possible.
And on the other hand, the minimization of the tax burden requires as little profit as possible.
And in general, to have as little profit as possible.
But the reason for this contradiction is excessive tax burden in the area of profit.
If the taxes are not excessive, then any businessman does not pay attention to this tax.
He considers it normal, natural.
And he does not minimize the indicator to which this tax is applied.
This has long been noticed in all capitalist countries.
And there are many capitalist countries where the tax on profit is reduced to its minimum.
For example, in New Zealand and in countries that impose similar tax burden, there is also a tax on profit.
However, if an enterprise invests in its own business
with a sum no less than the tax on profit, then it is exempted from paying this tax.
Pay attention.
In this case, any businessman is interested in showing the maximum profit.
And this profit is invested in the development of his own business.
And no one hides, even a penny, a penny, no one will hide the profit from tax deductions.
In these countries, the tax on profit is not fiscal, but stimulating.
Because the tax on profit does not contradict the main goal of capitalist production,
which is to earn maximum profit.
In our country, unfortunately, this is not the case.
In our country, the tax on profit brings a lion's share of taxes to the state budget.
This tax pays the main attention of our tax authorities.
It is clear that if this tax is the main attraction,
then the business is also attracted to this tax with increased attention,
with increased caution, and does not strive to show its profit excessively.
And does not strive to get the maximum profit.
This is the worst.
One thing is when a business does not strive to show its profit, but strives to create it.
And another thing is when it does not strive to create it at all.
This is the worst.
After all, without creating profit, the enterprise is not interested in increasing the productivity of labor,
reducing its cost.
Why? To pay more taxes?
Hence the slowdown of the country's economic development.
Taxation on profit is a very sharp tool.
If we want to have a high rate of economic development,
we must have a generous tax on profit.
We just need to transfer the burden of taxation to other taxes,
other taxes that are less sensitive to business.
In this case, business will be interested in the tax.
In this case, business will be interested in increasing the productivity of labor,
increasing the volume of production at the most possible rates.
In addition to the fact that the enterprise shows the profit it earns,
other factors that we will discuss now affect the amount of profit.
The fact is that each of us has a different role.
We are all in the same boat.
The fact is that each enterprise has its own accounting policy.
It chooses this policy for the current year and carries it out.
The current accounting policy can change the amount of profit received during the year.
But I would like to draw your attention to the fact that
there is a very important difference between the current accounting policy
and the current accounting policy.
But I would like to draw your attention to the fact that
the current accounting policy can change the amount of profit received during the year.
The current accounting policy can change the amount of profit received during the year.
Yes, you are absolutely right.
But only under two conditions.
If there is no inflation,
and all the products are not produced,
then any of the accounting policy options
ultimately give the same amount of profit.
And the amount will not change just by rearranging the places of the deposits.
But there is inflation, which leads to devaluation of money.
And there is an unproduced product, which may not be produced.
This leads to the fact that the amount of profit does not match.
How does the accounting policy affect the amount of profit received?
Here we can highlight the following cases.
The first is the method of amortization of property.
The Ministry of Finance gives the enterprise the right to choose
the method by which the amortization of the main funds is carried out.
These methods are specified in the Tax Code.
The method is linear or non-linear.
Using different methods,
you can get different amounts of amortization.
And the greater the amortization, the greater the value of the product,
the less the amount of profit that the enterprise receives,
and therefore the less tax that can be obtained from this profit.
And here, again, the interests of the state and business are contradicted.
In the modern tax system, as we have already said,
the business is interested in showing as little profit as possible.
And the state, and absolutely reasonably, absolutely legally,
strives to collect as much tax as possible,
because the state has expenses that it must bear.
The tax authorities strive to collect as much tax as possible.
Moreover, this tax is the most important among all taxes today.
This is where the contradiction arises.
The Ministry of Finance allowed the use of different amortization methods.
But the tax authorities prefer only one linear method of amortization.
The enterprise is between two fires.
But if the tax authorities adopt only the linear method of amortization,
all enterprises are forced to build their accounting policy
based on the linear method of amortization.
The rest of the methods are just optional,
and can be used, but cannot be shown to anyone.
Absolutely, it is not used.
Here we see a contradiction between the structures,
which are essentially one and the same,
since the Ministry of Taxation is the main part
and is subordinate to the Ministry of Finance.
But here the right hand and the left hand do different things.
The Ministry of Finance allows,
while the tax authorities prefer and adopt only one amortization method.
In fact, the amortization of property is a very interesting issue.
It is deeply developed scientifically.
Scientists have argued and concluded
that the cost of property is reduced non-linearly.
Most often it is not linear.
The cost is lost in the first period of the existence of the product.
If you have a car,
as soon as it leaves the car dealership,
it is instantly lost in price.
If you try to sell it to someone,
even without a single kilometer of mileage,
the price of the car will be lower.
We see a sharp reduction in the price of any product.
The same is true of all other equipment used in production.
First, there is a sharp reduction in the price,
then a slowdown.
But in practice, a linear, uniform method of amortizing the product
is used to transfer it to its cost.
It is that simple for the tax authorities.
The second method that enterprises can use
and which also affects the amount of profit is the method of evaluating production reserves.
As we have already said, any enterprise has reserves
that it uses to maintain the rhythm.
These reserves are periodically replenished.
There is a huge amount of goods purchased at different prices
of the same raw material.
All this is piled up, loaded, and then used by the enterprise.
What are the costs?
At what price are these reserves taken into account?
There are several options.
The following methods are allowed to be used.
At the initial price, at which price was it bought,
at that price it was written off.
The first purchased, the first written off.
The opposite is possible.
The last purchased, the first written off.
At the price at which the last reserve was bought,
at that price it was written off.
There is an option of the average,
when the cost is determined as the average
for all purchased raw materials.
For short-term goods that have a shelf life,
that cannot be stored for a long time,
for example, food, medicine,
there are party methods.
The word party, where a specific batch of goods is taken into account
when it was purchased, at what price.
This is taken into account.
For the enterprise itself, the various methods it uses
allow it to get both more and less profit.
If the costs of the goods purchased earlier
were used, then due to inflation
their prices were significantly lower
than the prices at which the goods are now being purchased.
Therefore, if we take into account the cost of the goods purchased earlier,
we will get the biggest profit.
This method is used when the enterprise needs to show profit.
And probably all enterprises would use this method
if they were not restrained by taxation.
The next point that affects the amount of profit
is the method of determining profit from the implementation.
The thing is, what should be considered
as the moment of the production implementation?
There are several possible options that are found in practice.
The first one is the moment of the production implementation
and can be considered as the unloading of the goods.
Yes, the goods were unloaded, but the money for it was not received yet.
The second option is the payment, when the money for the goods was received.
At first glance, it seems that these options have nothing to do with the amount of profit.
And what is the difference?
The fact is that if you need to pay a tax,
you need to have the means to pay it.
In this case, if we consider the profit from the payment,
we have the means to pay the tax.
We have already received this money,
then we can pay the tax properly.
If we consider the fact of the implementation of the unloading,
the payment is not yet received,
but you have unloaded the goods to the credit,
and provided the goods for the trade.
And the payment is delayed.
Sometimes the payment is delayed for a long time,
and you need to pay the tax now.
With what money?
You did not receive the money.
In this seemingly simple question,
the logical answer is that the payment method should be considered
at the time of the transaction,
which is required with the subsequent payment of taxes.
But here our reality interferes.
As soon as the payment method is applied,
it is possible to have a case that occurs in a non-profit business,
where the goods are unloaded,
the money is not officially received,
but the official payment is not.
Yes, there was a debt of two, three, ten years.
No one returned the money, because it was already paid.
Unofficially.
And in this case, there is no possibility of completing the transaction,
and therefore there is no possibility to pay the tax.
And if the payment method is considered,
then not all, but some non-profit enterprises
will immediately stop paying the tax at all.
They will say, we did not receive the money,
no one paid us,
and therefore we do not pay any taxes.
The tax service will receive a huge deficit in the tax on the profit.
And on the other hand, if we take the unloading method,
then we get the opposite situation.
Enterprises have problems.
They do not have money, but they need to pay taxes.
But there is no money.
Then they have to increase their creditorial debt,
to pay the taxes on which they have not yet received their money.
If we turn to the international standards of financial accountability,
then we will notice the following.
That the moment of the transaction is considered
the transfer of documents to the legal one.
That is, when documents are transferred from one enterprise to another.
The transaction has been made,
and this is the moment when taxes should be paid.
Choosing one form of accounting policy,
the enterprise decides how much profit it needs at the moment.
Does it need more profit now?
Or it can postpone the profit for a later period,
by saving it from the impact of inflation.
In fact, the profit for the enterprise is very important.
The fact is that the entire social sphere of the enterprise
can be maintained only by profit.
If we remember the period 20 years ago,
almost every large enterprise contained a social sphere.
These were dormitories, clinics, cultural centers,
children's pioneer camps, kindergartens, sanatoriums.
All this was necessary for each enterprise,
because it allowed it to attract the workforce
that was necessary for the performance of certain tasks.
But as soon as the enterprise began to have a profit,
the entire social sphere became instantly uninvited.
The enterprise has nothing to keep all the objects listed above.
There is no profit, so it is impossible to allocate funds for their maintenance.
All over the country, there are abandoned kindergartens,
pioneer camps, where the wind blows more often than children.
Many objects have switched to self-sufficiency,
they began to earn money on their own.
But they have ceased to be social objects of the enterprise.
Today, very few enterprises boast that they have social objects.
They are necessary for the employees of this enterprise.
Is it good that, for example,
women have to register at this kindergarten before the birth of a child
in order to get a place in a kindergarten?
This is not normal.
The social sphere in society must be and must be financed.
For this enterprise, there must be a profit.
The tax on profit should not be so strong
to completely overshadow the entire social policy in the country.
We will assume that the enterprise is making a profit,
that it does not completely refuse it and is thinking about its receipt.
And we, as financiers, who are designed to provide financial registration
and the proper execution of the profit,
must make sure that the enterprise receives as much profit as possible.
In addition to the accounting policy,
a number of other factors depend on the amount of profit.
First of all, the volume of goods and services produced.
It is clear that the more goods and services are produced,
the more opportunities are available to make a profit.
In addition to the total volume, the structure of the produced product also affects.
In fact, among the produced products there are more or less quality,
more expensive or less expensive,
which bring more profit or less profit,
which are more profitable or less profitable,
and the structure of the enterprise can increase the total amount of profit.
The price level is not the last place.
By regulating the prices of their products,
in the aspect in which the enterprise can do it on its own,
you can achieve an increase in profit.
And, of course, the most important point is self-worth.
Self-worth is in the opposite proportional dependence
on the profit that the enterprise receives.
That is, with the same revenue,
the lower the self-worth, the more profit.
Therefore, if each enterprise is interested in maximizing its profits,
it is primarily interested in reducing its self-worth.
If profit becomes the goal of the enterprise,
as an expression of its efficiency,
increasing productivity becomes the main way to increase profits.
If self-worth is definitely influenced by profit,
in the sense that the lower the self-worth, the more profit,
then the above three factors,
such as the volume of the implementation of the structure and the price level,
are not unambiguous.
In this respect, the influence on profit is the most important.
The thing is that it is necessary to take into account
the elasticity of the product.
This is the most important point that a businessman needs to know,
in order to properly implement his product.
Every product has elasticity.
Elasticity is the reaction of the product to the change in price.
How will the demand for a given product change with the change in price?
Elasticity is generally determined by the ratio of the increase in demand to the increase in price.
It is clear that if the price increases, the demand decreases.
Elasticity is always negative.
But the increase in price and the increase in demand
can be in different quantities.
The demand can decrease faster than the increase in price,
it can decrease slower than the increase in price,
or it can decrease to the same degree as the price changes.
Three levels of elasticity are determined.
They say that the demand for non-elastic products
decreases extremely slowly compared to the change in price.
The most non-elastic product is the salt from the kitchen.
You come to a store and see how much salt is in the kitchen.
You see that a kilogram of salt costs 13 rubles.
Tell me, please, if there is salt for 14 rubles,
will people buy it less or more?
The price is the same, but 15 rubles is the same,
and 20 rubles is the same.
We see that salt, despite the increase in its price,
the demand for it does not change.
This means that salt is an absolutely non-elastic product.
With the help of salt, you can get additional profit.
It's not a coincidence that in the old days,
Russia had a state monopoly on salt.
And only the state had the right to sell salt.
However, this led to excessive increases in the price of salt,
and it caused salt riots, history remembers it.
Nevertheless, salt is such a non-elastic product
that it can bring very high income to those who make it.
The reason is that salt is very much needed by people.
It cannot be replaced by anything.
Salt cannot be replaced with sugar, milk, bread.
Salt cannot be replaced by anything.
It is very much needed.
It is needed in small quantities.
Moreover, the price of salt is so low
that people's purchasing power
is so low that they are easily swayed by the price of salt.
The other opposite is the case of elastic products,
where the smallest change in price can cause a huge drop in demand.
This happens with products that have a lot of substitutes.
A typical example is clothes.
Clothes have so many substitutes
that the buyer is ready to switch to any other type of clothing
if the one he planned to buy seems too expensive to him.
Therefore, clothes have a very high elasticity.
The smallest increase in price can cause a huge drop in demand
for elastic products.
There are products with so-called single elasticity,
where the price and demand changes are very much in the quantitative sense.
The higher the price, the lower the demand.
As a result, neither increase nor decrease in price
bring any additional profit.
Knowing what product you are producing
is the first task of a businessman.
And that is why.
The thing is that in order to get additional profit from the product,
you need to pay attention to its elasticity.
For non-elastic products,
look at salt,
for non-elastic products,
look at salt.
In order to get additional profit,
you need to raise the price.
The price increases,
the cost remains the same,
and the profit increases sharply.
And for elastic products,
in order to increase the profit,
you need to lower the price.
Pay attention,
for non-elastic products,
you need to raise the price,
and for elastic products,
you need to lower the price a little bit.
And the demand for this product increases sharply.
Where does it come from?
It's the former buyers of other products
who were ready to buy other products earlier.
But since only your product became cheaper,
and not other products,
they instantly switched to your product.
The demand has increased sharply.
You can sell tens, hundreds, thousands of times more products,
lowering the price by a penny.
Your profit from a single product decreases,
but the mass of profit you get
increases sharply,
because you manage to sell a huge amount of products.
But this method of lowering the price for elastic products
can be used only if you are able to provide
a larger number of products for the market.
If you have a production,
and you can increase the production,
for example, from one shift to two,
from two to three,
or you have unlimited supplies,
and you can order more and more products,
then you can safely go for a price reduction
for elastic products,
sell more products,
and get more profit.
This is a very important point.
And every businessman,
before using the price and production volume
to regulate his profit,
should first think about
the elasticity of the product he sells.
But elasticity not only depends on nature.
Elasticity of the product depends on
the environment of the product and other products.
If there are no competitors,
substitutes,
then your product increases its non-elasticity.
And the same clothes,
which would seem to be the most elastic product,
if for some reason
all competitors disappear,
and you become the only seller of clothes,
your product becomes non-elastic.
And vice versa.
If there are more and more competitors,
and these competitors themselves reduce the price,
then your product becomes more and more elastic,
and all buyers leave you.
And you can no longer produce your products.
Thus, the environment
affects the elasticity of your product.
Knowing this,
a businessman takes care not only of
selling less elastic products,
but also of creating an environment
where the elasticity of the product decreases.
For example, in the trading network you can see
products that are sold
under the trademark of a given trading network.
And under this pretext,
the company limits the purchase
of similar products from other manufacturers,
and only sells its own products
under the brand of its trading network.
And thus, in the trading network,
there is only one salt,
one single sugar.
In the eyes of the buyer,
the competition disappears.
The elasticity of this product increases.
The higher the elasticity of this product,
the more you can boldly increase the price of the business,
and make additional profit
when selling such a product.
Thus, we see
that the volume of implementation
and the price level of the product
do not necessarily affect the profit,
but through the elasticity of this product.
It is important to pay attention
to the elasticity of the product
and to manage it.
For example,
oligopolies very often
enter into a contract
and agree to sell the product
under the same conditions.
Thus, the competition between them disappears.
Let's say we have three manufacturers
who produce the same product.
When they entered into a contract,
they competed.
Each tried to sell more of his product,
and consequently reduced the price,
which forced others to reduce the price.
As a result, even the most unelastic product, salt,
is sold at a very low price.
But if the manufacturers enter into a contract
and agree that they will sell,
for example, at the same price,
all salt manufacturers,
and suddenly decide that it is more profitable for them
to sell at the same price,
and not to agree with each other,
the price of salt will go higher and higher.
There is no competition.
Salt is the most unelastic product,
and the price increase
brings additional profit to each manufacturer.
And the buyer has nowhere to turn.
There is no other product
that is sold cheaper.
The price is the same for all of them.
There are three forms of conspiracy
that can be found among the oligopolists.
The first is the sale at a single price.
The second is the market share.
Each of the oligopolists gets his territory,
and only on this territory
does he sell his product.
There are no other competitors.
He sells his product,
acting as a monopolist on this territory,
and consequently selling it
at a monopoly high price.
This is the same as when
the trading networks sell at their own price.
They have made their own territory,
their own trading network,
a monopoly for themselves.
They don't let any competitors in.
And within this trading network,
they sell their product
at a monopoly high price.
The oligopolist remains.
And the third form of conspiracy
is the purchase at a single price.
Despite the fact that
we are dealing with oligopolists,
they don't produce any product themselves,
they buy some raw materials,
some semi-finished products,
some accessories,
so that they can make products from them.
They can agree
that they will set
a single purchase price.
But this is only the first step.
As soon as they agree
that they have set a single purchase price,
they take the second step.
They agree that they will reduce
this purchase price.
And those who do not agree
with this agreement,
those who sell them products,
have nowhere to go.
No matter where they go,
everyone has the same low price.
And the price is getting lower and lower.
Thus, the oligopolists
get additional profit.
When we talk about oligopolists
and that they can get
additional profit
by entering into a conspiracy,
we must realize
that these actions of oligopolists
are punishable,
criminalized
in all countries of the world.
Conspiracy is considered
an unfair business
because it gets
additional profit
without making any effort
to improve
the product
and services
that the consumer
gets.
In all countries of the world
in case of discovery of a conspiracy,
those who enter into it
bear a certain responsibility.
But this does not make
the world less of a conspiracy.
Those who enter into a conspiracy,
those who agree
to run a business
of a conspired one,
do it more carefully,
more carefully.
And this is a very important
and important thing.
And this is a very important thing.
For example,
examples from our reality
that can tell us
that a conspiracy exists
around us.
If suddenly
in Moscow,
at the same time
at all gas stations
the price of gasoline
increases by the same amount
on the same day.
What does this mean?
It means that
the gas station
or its owners
could have agreed
at what price
they would sell their gasoline
starting from this day
and this hour.
This is an element of conspiracy.
Because imagine
that if it was not so
and only one of them
decided that he would
increase the price of gasoline
sharply,
and all the others
would not do it.
And he was forced
to return the price
to the same level
it was.
A separately taken manufacturer
cannot increase the price
and secure itself
at this price level
without improving
the quality of the product
or the services
with which the product is sold.
And conspiracies can.
And what should the car lovers
do?
All gas stations
sell gasoline
at the same price.
They are forced to buy.
But it is very difficult
to prove that there was a conspiracy.
The fact of increasing the price
is not a fact
of a conspiracy.
It is only
a hypothesis
to what it is.
Yes, it is a hypothesis
without a basis
of a proven fact.
If we manage to get a document
with the signatures of all the owners
where it is written
that they agreed
with such a day,
with such a time
with such a new price
it is proof of the existence of a conspiracy.
And then such proof
is the basis
for criminal prosecution.
There is no document
and no proof.
Even with a hypothetical assumption
that there is a conspiracy.
Oligopolists very often
use the element of conspiracy.
The thing is
that in order to become an oligopolist
it is necessary
to have very few
such business units.
Two, three, five
for the whole industry.
Two or three enterprises
for the whole industry
that control the whole industry.
It is easy
to enter into a conspiracy with each other.
They know each other
and they know each other very well.
But here they have two possible behavior options.
They can compete
very much with each other.
And since there are not many such enterprises
in the whole industry
if they are very large
and very rich
then the competition
can take the most tough forms.
First of all, by reducing the price.
When such enterprises compete
with each other
they start reducing the price
to lure the buyers to their side.
And the price collapse begins.
One company
is ahead of the other
and the other one catches up with it
reducing the price.
In the 90s
we had
an example of such competition
between mobile operators.
There were several of them
all over Moscow.
And they compete with each other
reducing
the price
almost every week
or every month.
For the buyers
it was very good.
We went down from the sky-high
services of telephone
to the acceptable
level of payment
of telephone services.
But then,
starting from some point
mobile operators
started to compete
with each other
by the price factor.
And vice versa.
If you ask a consumer
from the point of view
of the consumer
which mobile operator is better
everyone answers
that they are about the same.
They reached parity
when they stopped competing
with the price.
Why did it happen?
Did they agree
that during the competition
they can destroy each other
or even destroy everyone
and no company
of such level
will remain?
The reason is
that sooner or later
the company will take its place
and the company will stop
competing with the price
and will continue to run
a normal business
but the price level will decrease.
Did it happen
and did the prices stop?
It's hard to say
but the prices stopped
and the competition
stopped.
There is another example
more obvious
with evidence.
There is a government
and a budget
Russian-Belarusian budget
and the money is allocated
for business support.
There was a program
called
Union TV
and in this program
it was written
which TV factories
in Belarus
and Russia
in which regions
should sell
their products
and it was signed
by the main figures
of the government
and this is
one of the forums
of the agreement
on the territory of sales.
Each factory
has its own territory
where only it can
sell its products.
We see that even at the interstate level
there are cases
of collusion
which can only be qualified
and which allows to divide
the sales region
and sell the products.
Yes, it was necessary
to support the domestic manufacturers
Belarusian and Russian
with foreign TV manufacturers.
But according to the forum
we had a place
in the officially signed
agreement.
Let's move on
to the next question
and say that
besides
the profit from the agreement
which monopolists have
they can get
profit
by reducing
their cost.
Getting profit
by reducing their cost
is probably
the most decent
and the most decent
way to get profit
from the point of view of the consumer.
Because it is a way
to increase the productivity of the labor.
Reducing their cost
and consequently reducing the prices
is a way
of scientific and technical progress.
It is always a positive
and a phenomenon
which is welcomed
all over the world.
I think
that the time is not far
when we in our country
will raise
the policy
of increasing
the productivity
of the labor
on the account
of the economic policy.
And when we will not only
increase the cost
of the domestic product
which is an important point
but also increase
the productivity
of the labor.
Reducing the cost
and consequently reducing the prices
should be done.
We all know
that the imported goods
are always characterized
by the same dependence
on the price.
The price is increasing,
decreasing, decreasing.
Remember the computer.
Remember any processor
that is connected to this computer.
As soon as a new processor appears
it appears at a very high price.
But a very short period of time
passes and the price of this processor
decreases.
Why?
Because the productivity of the labor
increases.
The marriage decreases.
The output of the product increases.
You can give examples
of Russian business
where the price was high
and then it decreased
right in front of your eyes.
This policy is not accepted
in our country.
We do not have
a custom
that every product
loses its price
as it is produced.
Most likely we have a different direction.
Due to inflation
the price of a product
will increase slowly.
Therefore, the transition
to the policy of increasing
productivity and decreasing
cost is a major direction
for any country,
including, or maybe in the first place,
for our country.
But here,
to explain why
one country is predisposed
to increase the productivity
and the other is not,
we need to answer
to the following question.
I will draw a picture
where you will answer
why some countries
increase the productivity
and others do not.
Imagine two countries
that produce
the same product
in both countries.
But in one country
the level of salary
of all employees
is very low,
well, at least
below the minimum wage.
And in the other country
the level of salary
is very high.
The standard of living is very high.
And they produce the same product.
The question is
which of these countries
is interested
in increasing
the productivity
of the work
in the country.
And should we reduce
the cost of living?
Where is the minimum cost
or where is the highest
in the same product?
The answer is obvious.
Where is the highest
standard of living
the business is more interested
in increasing
the productivity of the work.
To introduce new technology,
to conduct scientific research
to extract this product
from the market
is a great profit.
And where the standard of living
is very low
there is no need
to introduce new technology.
Why?
There is nothing
to save.
Therefore, the productivity of the work
is always increasing
at a higher pace
in the country
where the standard of living is high.
This is a very important point.
The higher the standard of living
the higher the productivity of the work
in our country.
And we should not forget
about this.
Our businessmen
who, in fact,
determine the level of salary
of all the citizens of our country.
By saving on salary
we stop
the scientific and technical progress.
We stop it completely.
Forever.
The cost of living is a very important point.
To reduce the cost of living
should be the goal
of any business.
And, among other things,
the goal of the country's economic policy.
A very important point
is to create conditions
in which the business
benefits from reducing the cost of living.
We have already discussed
that the cost of living
is the cost of production
and sale of products
expressed in the form of money.
In order to produce
a product
you have to pay
a considerable cost.
You have to build factories,
buy equipment,
hire workers,
buy raw materials,
create goods
and services
that are needed.
All this requires a cost.
And in the modern world
the cost is huge.
In order to produce a product
you have to pay a considerable cost
and minimize the cost.
Minimizing the cost
is the goal
of any business.
The lower the cost,
the higher the profit.
The cost of living
can also be considered
as the profit,
as we have discussed today,
in different ways.
First of all,
the simplest form of cost of living
is the cost of the product
that is produced.
This is a small cost
because it only includes
the costs that are directly related
to the production of the product.
But the thing is
that this product is not produced
on an uninhabited island
and the worker
who produces it
is not in a vacuum.
He works in a certain workshop
and in this workshop
there is not only
the cost of the production
of the product
but also the total production costs
that are related
to the maintenance of the workshop.
There is a head of the workshop
with his salary,
there is a warehouse,
there is an ATK
that checks the quality,
the technical control department,
there is a technical staff
that cleans the workshop.
All this requires additional costs.
Of course,
they are not related to the production of the product,
but without these costs
there will be no production.
Therefore, these costs
are also related to the cost of the workshop.
As a result,
we get the cost of the workshop
taking into account the costs
that are related to the workshop.
But the workshop
does not exist
by itself.
The workshop
is a component unit
of the whole factory.
There are many workshops
but besides the workshops
there are also
the services
that are common for the whole factory.
There is an administrative and management staff,
there is a design bureau,
there is a material and technical supply department,
there are transport services,
there is a security guard
of this factory,
there are security equipment services.
These are all services
that are common for the whole factory,
which are also
naturally
costly.
And without these services
our factory
cannot exist.
Imagine,
there is no service of material and technical supply.
What will our factory produce?
There are no people who buy
or there is no department that implements this product.
All of them are needed.
Although they are not directly related
to the production process of this product.
But they are related
to the production process
of this product.
Their costs
are also related
to the cost of production.
As a result, we get
the production cost.
But the production cost
is reflected only by the production.
There are also expenses for sales,
for promotion of this product.
For example,
some of the product is given to the goods loan
with the payment deadline.
Do certain costs are needed for this?
Yes, they are.
They also have certain costs.
Therefore, the expenses for sales
are also related to the cost of production.
And all together,
when all these expenses are accumulated,
we get the full cost of production.
Moreover, the operational cost
of the creation of the product
can sometimes take a very modest part.
Therefore, when we talk about
the reduction of the cost of production,
we are not only talking about
how to increase the productivity of the work
in the production process itself,
but also how to increase the productivity
of all the services
that are at the enterprise.
The story in the languages
of the comparison of the domestic enterprises
with the foreign enterprises
in terms of the number of
service personnel.
In our country,
an import plant is being bought,
it is being launched,
and the same plant
is operating in another country.
And the same factory
And as soon as it starts operating,
it turns out that the number of employees
who work at the factory
in our country
and the number of employees
who work at the same factory
in another country
are significantly different.
That is, we have more people
working at the enterprise,
and therefore the expenses
that relate to the cost of production
will be significantly higher.
This is no longer the achievement
of the last few days,
but the fact that there are factories
that produce goods
that produce products
without the participation of people.
The number of people is minimized.
Why? Because the salary is high.
The salary is high,
so the economy in the live labor
is the goal of the business.
New technology is being introduced,
robots are being installed.
The general knowledge of the world
is that the economy
is being developed.
For example,
the assembly of TVs
is being carried out
at such automata factories
without the participation of people.
In Japan,
the assembly of cars
is being carried out
without the participation of people.
The car assembly shop
does not even turn on the light.
There is absolute darkness.
Not a single worker.
And then the conveyor belt
is being assembled.
And the car is ready to go.
There is a struggle
for the reduction of self-worth.
Not only of the production,
but of all levels of self-worth
that participate
and influence
the full self-worth of the product.
I think that for our country
this is the task
of the near future.
When we understand
that the reduction of self-worth
is the main path of development.
Because until we realize it,
science in our country
will not develop.
Neither the technical science,
nor the applied science
as it is being developed in the West.
It is not developing
because there are very smart people
who want to develop it.
Yes, there are a lot of
talented people
who want to develop it.
But the science
is not developing
because of their self-worth.
The business itself
makes them develop it.
Otherwise, you will not survive.
Our self-worth,
the business itself
makes us forget about science.
Because this is how you can live.
And the consequence
is the high level of science
in some countries
and the far-reaching level
of science in our country.
For capitalism,
the development of scientific and technical progress
is impossible.
And the rapid development
of scientific and technical progress
without the applied science
is impossible.
But it should be
the goal of any business.
Any businessman
should sleep and think
that he needs to introduce science
because he needs to reduce his self-worth.
Otherwise, I will not survive.
Until he thinks so,
science will not develop.
It will just start to
fountain science
all over the country.
And only the self-worth
of the product affects it.
The high level of self-worth
which should be reduced,
reduced and reduced.
And in self-worth,
as we know,
the important component
is the salary.
The higher the standard of living
of the population,
the faster science will develop
because the higher the standard of living,
the higher the productivity of labor.
The higher the productivity of labor,
the higher the quality of the product
will be.
Therefore,
the attention to self-worth,
to its reduction
is the most important point
of our near future.
As soon as we solve
the problem of inflation.
Today, inflation in the country
is more important
than the scientific and technical progress.
It eats everything.
It does not leave the means
for the development of science.
Even if a businessman
thinks about the development of science,
he has no means for this science.
He must invest it
in something every day.
Otherwise, due to inflation,
he will be left without money.
But since the level of inflation
in our country is decreasing
every year,
and according to the forecasts
of the Ministry of Finance,
it should drop to 3%
in the near future,
which corresponds to the level
of the most developed countries in the world,
then we will go to the same level
as they did
in the scientific and technical progress.
And what we talked about
in the lecture today
will be our daily practice,
our daily work
on reducing self-worth
and increasing productivity.
In addition to reducing self-worth
and increasing the volume of production
and increasing profits,
it is very important
to imagine
the reserves
of the enterprises
according to these indicators.
If the reserve
of the growth of productivity
and the reserve
of the growth of the volume of production
of the reduction of the volume
of production
and the reserve
of the reduction of self-worth
of the increase of the quality
of production.
If the reserve exists
for the achievement of this reserve,
it is worth fighting,
it is worth sending forces there.
The financiers solve this issue
and this issue is included
in the program of our lecture today.
The slide you see now
shows examples
of the reserve
of the growth of productivity.
It is a reserve of profit.
Yes, it is.
We have already discussed
that if we are talking
about non-elastic goods,
then it makes sense
to increase the volume of production
and at the same time
to reduce the price.
If we are talking
about elastic goods,
then we should be very careful
with increasing the volume of production.
We should look at the possibility
of increasing the volume of production.
If we have such an opportunity,
if we have a limited amount
of products in our warehouse
and we are told
that it is easy
to increase the volume of production
by 2-10 times,
then we can consider
increasing the volume of production
as a reserve of profit.
We reduce the price,
the demand increases sharply
because our goods are elastic.
We increase the reserve
of increasing the volume of production
and we increase the volume
of the produced goods in several times.
Yes, the profit of a unit of production
decreases,
but because the volume of production
increases sharply,
the product of increasing
the volume of production
increases the profit
of a unit of production.
It is a serious reserve.
We should take it seriously,
calculate it taking into account
whether we can get additional profit
by increasing the volume of production.
The second way is reducing
the cost of production.
I told you about it today.
There is a direct way
to reduce the cost of production.
There are no alternative options.
By reducing the cost of production
we can increase the profit
because the profit,
as you remember,
is the difference between the revenue
and the cost of production.
If we reduce the cost of production
we get more profit.
You may ask
why we do not reduce
the cost of production so sharply.
Why do we go this way
in the last place?
Why do we think about it
in the last place
despite the obviousness of this way?
The answer is simple.
The fact is that every businessman
decides
the task
that is in front of him.
To reduce the cost of production
we should make certain efforts.
For example,
we should update the equipment
and install more advanced equipment.
Advanced equipment
means often imported equipment,
expensive equipment.
A businessman decides the task.
If he buys this expensive equipment
and installs it,
how much will he save
on the salary
of the workers who get money?
He will save nothing.
He will save a penny.
Is it worth buying this equipment
and increasing the cost of production
and reducing the cost of production?
Why?
What if the purchased equipment
will lead to a significant reduction
because the salary is very high
and the cost of production is very high?
Then this equipment
will be bought very quickly.
Then yes.
Then it makes sense to buy
new equipment and reduce the cost of production.
But until you can pay
the smallest salary,
which is simply impossible to pay,
until you can buy
new equipment,
there is no reason.
There is another important point.
The thing is that
buying imported equipment
and installing it in your own country
plays an important role
in the exchange rate
of national currencies.
If the exchange rate of national currency
is low in a country
that imports equipment,
then what is available in our country
will be very expensive.
But our equipment park
is not updated 100%.
Why?
Because the equipment is expensive for us.
It is not expensive for them,
it is available at every factory.
But it is expensive for us.
Our exchange rate is low.
The closer our exchange rate
will be to a certain parity,
to its average level,
the stronger the currency will be.
The cheaper the import will be.
And it will be easier
to buy new equipment
that we cannot produce in our country.
And vice versa.
In a country
where national currency
is highly fortified,
buying imported equipment
becomes very cheap.
If in our country
there were no such problems,
we would have a very good exchange rate.
If in our country
the exchange rate
was not the same as it is today,
when we have undervalued currency,
but it was overvalued,
then all our factories
and enterprises would have updated
all their equipment.
We would say
that we have no old equipment left.
We have all the latest equipment.
Why? Because it is all very cheap abroad.
It is very cheap.
You can buy it and update
all production.
You see, the exchange rate
affects the use
of imported equipment
in our country.
If the exchange rate is low,
imported equipment is not used.
The same goes for equipment
that is over 100 years old.
And it is still in factories,
the machines produced in the 19th century.
Until now
I have been to an aviation factory
where the press
was produced
in the 19th century.
It is a German press.
It works well,
but it was produced in the 19th century.
It is not in museums
any more.
It is all over the world.
But it works in our country.
Because it is expensive
to buy a similar press,
a new, modern one,
even for an aviation factory.
It is expensive.
The next point
that can increase
the profit
is to improve the quality of production.
The quality of production
is also a controversial issue.
means to produce a product
that brings more profit
to the manufacturer,
that meets the needs
of the buyers.
And this is a very important point.
We do not consider
the conditions
when a product is produced
without a defect,
and then the same product
is produced without a defect.
We have already left
the times
when the lion's share
of defective products
was produced.
Today, all the products
are of a proper quality.
But
the proper quality
can be different.
There is a high quality level,
an expensive product
of a high quality level.
There is also a quality,
reliable, good,
but lower quality level,
even lower, even lower.
Each product has its own consumer.
To improve the quality of the product
is necessary.
This is a very important point.
To avoid such a theorization,
let's move on
to the practical language.
There is AutoVaz,
which produces Zhiguli.
There are import factories
that produce cars.
The difference between Zhiguli
and imported cars
is the difference in the quality of the car.
To improve the quality of the car
means to produce our product,
which meets
the best imported samples.
This is what we are talking about
when we talk about improving the quality.
A better quality car
is produced at a higher price,
and it brings a higher profit
to its manufacturers.
The desire to produce a quality car,
as well as the desire to produce
a quality product,
should be present,
organically present
in any business.
Only then will it strive for it
and try to produce
a better quality car.
Unfortunately,
not all our enterprises
produce products
of the world's quality.
There are different reasons
for this.
We will not analyze all the reasons,
but we will focus on some of them.
The thing is that
one of the reasons
for the two-sided protection
from the state
and the manufacturers
is the lack of
support from the state.
On the one hand,
if we do not support
the domestic manufacturer,
we can lose it.
We lost the AZLK plant.
The Moskvich car
was a car
of the previous period.
We did not support it,
we lost it.
If we can approach
any business
without supporting it,
we will lose it.
We can lose AvtoVAZ,
we can lose our civil aviation.
Everything that is behind
the world's leading level
today,
especially in the light
of the rapid changes
that will come
with the entry
of the World Trade Organization,
support is necessary
in those industries
that we need.
For example,
our country without aviation
is not our country anymore.
A huge country
where you can move
from one point of the country
to another point
only quickly with the help
of aviation,
such a country should have
aviation.
A small country
where you can move
from one end of the country
to another in half an hour
by car,
such a country
can not exist.
It is not applicable
inside the country.
For our country
it is a fundamental issue.
We are talking about civil aviation,
there is also military aviation
that certainly requires
good aviation
and the development
of the aviation industry.
Therefore,
if we abandon aviation,
we will lose it.
If we abandon
a certain industry,
it can stop
developing at all.
It just keeps
and allocates
all the funds
it needs.
And instead of developing
in a competitive way
with the whole world,
it starts to live its own life
and the production
of this enterprise
becomes absolutely
impossible.
To find the golden mean
where we will have
a great development
of a certain industry
and on the other hand
we will not lose it.
It is not a simple issue
because
the interests are intertwined here.
On the one hand,
the interests of the state
and on the other hand
the interests of people
who work on these enterprises.
In Togliatti
the vast majority of people
work on these enterprises.
It is also a social problem.
But on the other hand,
it is also impossible
to stop the development
of the cars we produce today.
That is the problem
of quality improvement.
It is not a simple problem
in our period of history
how to improve the quality.
But for us,
the main thing is
to create
economic conditions
for improving the quality of production.
Just by saying
that the quality of production
is good
you will not succeed.
The best economic condition
for stimulating the quality improvement
is competition.
If there is competition,
the manufacturer
is interested in improving the quality.
If there is no competition,
there is no quality
and there is no competition.
There is no need to say.